---
layout: post
categories: tldr, organization, culture, remote
date: 2015/11/05 22:40:00
title: Snippets
---

A good habit I picked up at [the last place](https://google.com) was keeping
"snippets" - short notes about what I worked on in a particular week. Something
like this:

---

### Weekly snippets: $project cleanup; meetings & troubleshooting.

"Short" week, in that I carried 2 days' work into it. All caught up (down?)
now.

*   Removed daemonization code from $project- we expect to run it under
supervisor everywhere. $link

*   Updated $otherproject to depend on that, plus Puppet changes to run
under supervisor, deployed to $cluster.

*   Ran and wrote up a $topic meeting. $link

*   A frustrating day investigating $protocol issues in $cluster, much
excluded but nothing pinpointed. Also some troubleshooting support during an
incident on Thursday night - opened $task and updated $doc for followup.

*   Wrote up a plan for $new\_project.

*   Discussed $speculative\_project ideas with Eman & Charlie.

*   Copious Free Time: started working on [Simple ESP Security Association Manager](https://github.com/emauton/sesame).

---

I write about this here because snippets are **brilliant**. I love having
them to look back over - to find PRs I worked on, or docs I wrote, or when what
happened, what I was thinking at a particular time. Without them, I'd be at a
loss to explain what I did in any particular month, or would need to
reconstruct that from old notes or emails. Writing a retrospective of my first
year at [the new place](https://www.hostedgraphite.com) - do I get to call it
new after a year? - pulled this into focus.

Some of my colleagues keep daily snippets. I find that weekly is about the
right granularity for me: real nitty-gritty detail is in a notebook I maintain
day to day. We've taken to just submitting them to a Github repo, and made a
robot to notify us when something's committed so we can follow along. As a
remote worker, I need to make it easy for the team to stay in touch with my
work, and snippets certainly help.
