---
layout: post
categories: bees
date: 2020/06/01 21:25:00
title: Horizontal National Beehive
---

[![A deep horizontal beehive in blue and red with a gabled roof](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/final.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/final.jpg)

My latest DIY project - and rather a long one, all told - has been to build
some horizontal beehives. I've been thinking about this for a while: I don't
enjoy the disturbance, aggravation and heavy lifting of beekeeping with stacked
boxes. Having read about [Layens
hives](https://horizontalhive.com/keeping-bees-with-a-smile/georges-layens-book.shtml)
and [horizontal hives in general](https://horizontalhive.com/), I thought I
could try my hand at building my own.

[![An overview sketch of a horizontal beehive, with some requirements and notes](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/plans-001.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/plans-001.jpg)

I wanted an easy path to rehoming my existing colonies, so I preferred
something that would take
[National](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BS_National_Beehive) or
[Rose](http://www.rosebeehives.com/what-are-rose-hives.html) frames. I had
various panels and other National hive parts left over from my [8-frame Rose
beehive](/2019/03/10/8-frame-rose-beehive-boxes/) project, so I wanted
to reuse those. I settled on a "deep" design where the hive is entirely
enclosed in insulation (apart from a small entrance) so the bees have the
maximum freedom to manage their own environment.

[![Panel parts laid out on a table: three 8-frame Rose panels with rebates + long National "fillets" plus an extension to National depth](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/panels-001.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/panels-001.jpg)

Given the parts I had, there was some slightly laborious jigsaw work necessary.
Here you can see three 8-frame Rose panels along with various pieces to complete them.

[![Two extension boards: one to a little more than National brood depth, one to "full" depth of the deep hive](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/panels-002.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/panels-002.jpg)

I wanted National brood frame depth, so I had to extend my shorter Rose panels.
On the right is an extension that allows space to fit a floor; the longer
extension to the left allows for the full depth of the hive: National brood
(225mm) + 100mm for open space underneath a mesh floor.

[![Rose pieces, extensions, and other parts laid out for assembly](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/panels-003.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/panels-003.jpg)

Jigsaw pieces. About here I was slightly regretting not doing something a bit
simpler, but I got there in the end and reused some material that might
otherwise have ended up as planters.

[![An assembled full-depth panel from the rear](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/panels-004.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/panels-004.jpg)

[![An assembled full-depth panel from the front](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/panels-005.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/panels-005.jpg)

Instead, these got upcycled into panels for these new hives. I calculated that
three 8-frame lengths per hive would make for 24 frames in a 75L volume: small
for "production" beekeeping but perfect for my "backyard" operation, and within
the preferred size range for wild colonies. Fun fact: this is about the volume
of [the hive I removed for a neighbour](https://imgur.com/gallery/o1wF9Mi).

[![A side panel made of some trimmed Rose hive sides plus a 25mm frame](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/panels-006.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/panels-006.jpg)

[![The full set of completed panels for three hives](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/panels-007.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/panels-007.jpg)

I was also able to upcycle sides from my Rose hives (with a little trimming).
Altogether, I wanted three hives so that was a fair number of panels to
assemble: once I got going it was not hard, though.
 
[![An assembled box showing the joined panels and 25mm spaces ready to take insulation](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/box-001.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/box-001.jpg)

[![The three assembled boxes ready to take insulation](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/box-002.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/box-002.jpg)

Assembling the panels into boxes required some care with right angles, but was
straightforward. I used a ridiculous number of screws on this project and I
have no regrets. :o)

[![An assembled box with insulation added](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/box-003.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/box-003.jpg)

This 25mm insulation - a "sandwich" of foil and foam - was a pleasure to work
with.

[![The off-cuts from a full 2.4m x 1.2m panel of insulation](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/box-004.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/box-004.jpg)

My beautiful assistant is a
[bin-packing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bin_packing_problem) genius, so
generally if I can get her advice on cut lists I have the minimum of awkward
off-cuts.

[![A long plywood board partly cut outside on the ground](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/cladding-001.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/cladding-001.jpg)

[![Broken down plywood cladding boards](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/cladding-002.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/cladding-002.jpg)

My least favourite of pretty much any project is breaking down large boards,
which I do here with a circular saw. Having taken advice from my local Internet
shed nerds, I am going to invest in a tracksaw after this project.

[![A hive with external cladding finished in plywood](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/cladding-003.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/cladding-003.jpg)

[![Three hives laid out on rails in the barn for painting](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/cladding-004.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/cladding-004.jpg)

[![Three hives painted - a light gray-blue](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/cladding-005.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/cladding-005.jpg)

With the insulation applied, I cut out some spaces where entrances would be
later and filled them with wood (so I could later drill right through), and
clad the whole thing. A happy accident here was that the full depth of the hive
was exactly two Rose side panels - so I was able to use those on the sides.

Finally, I painted each of the hives with a fairly neutral base colour. I like
to decorate with bright colours on the roof, stand, etc.

[![A gabled roof frame and parts for more, ready to assemble](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/roof-001.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/roof-001.jpg)

[![A cut panel of corrugated roofing](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/roof-002.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/roof-002.jpg)

[![Three painted roof frames - red, blue, and purple](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/roof-003.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/roof-003.jpg)

I like gabled roofs. We had some corrugated roofing left over from a previous
project, so I was able to break it up easily to fit these roofs. There was
enough that we decided to make the overhang at the eaves long; we might trim
that later if they catch too much wind.

The three hives I will transfer to these already have these colours in place,
so I thought it would be nice to use the same scheme for this project.

[![A jig for cutting 80 degree angles on 2x4s](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/stand-001.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/stand-001.jpg)

[![An assembled A-frame for the stand](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/stand-002.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/stand-002.jpg)

[![The fully assembled stand, with some old floor boards as cross-beams](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/stand-003.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/stand-003.jpg)

I wanted to lift the hive bodies up high enough that the top of the frames
would be at my elbow. This will make manipulating frames a rather relaxing
thing, compared to bending over a hive on a low stand.

The stand design I came up with had a lot of 80 degree angles in two-by-fours,
so I made a simple jig that worked out great.

[![The finished hive in sunlight](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/finished-001.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/finished-001.jpg)

The hive is just under a metre long, with the entrance is at about 95cm. I'm
really pleased with how it looks.

[![The hive with the roof off, showing seven covering panels and an additional panel with a feeding hole](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/finished-002.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/finished-002.jpg)

With the roof off, you can see the hive is covered with small panels. I can,
for example, take one off quietly at the "back" of the hive - away from the
entrance - to check how many frames of honey the bees have filled, without
causing much consternation for the hive as a whole.

The roof space will be filled with insulation - likely a sack full of wood
shavings.

[![The rear of the hive, showing the lower panel held by some simple turning clamps](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/finished-003.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/finished-003.jpg)

At the rear, there's access to the bottom space under the hive to clean it out,
replace moisture-soaking material, or check for _Varroa_ drop.

[![The hive with a couple of panels removed, showing a frame inside, the mesh floor, and wood shavings in the space below](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/finished-004.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/finished-004.jpg)

[![The hive with all panels removed](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/finished-005.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/finished-005.jpg)

[![The entrance viewed from inside](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/finished-006.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/finished-006.jpg)

Looking inside the hive, we can see the mesh floor and the open space below it
filled to about half depth with wood shavings from [my brother's
workshop](https://www.instagram.com/dee.synnottwoodcraft/). This will absorb
moisture from the "condensing" colony above.

[![A deep horizontal beehive in blue and red with a gabled roof](/img/horizontal-national-hive/thumbs/final.jpg)](/img/horizontal-national-hive/final.jpg)

And there you have it! [Let me know](https://emauton.org/about/) if
you have any questions or comments. <3
